**Did Marx prove capitalism must end, and did he intend to?**

Karl Marx was born in Trier, Prussia in 1818\. He is known for his critique of capitalism through works such as the Communist Manifesto (1848) and Das Kapital (1867). His theory of *historical materialism* reinterpreted the ideas of Georg Wilhelm Hegel to explain social and economic change. Within historical materialism, Marx argued that society is made up of an economic base with the forces and relations of production and a superstructure which are the laws, culture and politics that support the base. (Marx, 1859\) Moreover, Wolff explains the economic base is the primary determinant of social consciousness. (Wolff, 2003\) Marx stated that history moved forward through class struggles as different groups fight over control and relationships. His idea was that the final class struggle would lead to communism.

Marx theorised capitalism would cause its own end due to class struggle and the exploitation of surplus value.  
This exploitation is related to the concept of relentless competition in markets, that in order to survive, firms must reduce costs and increase efficiency by investing in capital and exploiting labour. They did this by paying workers based on their ability to work, not the value they actually create. This “surplus value” is extracted from the worker’s unpaid labour and becomes the capitalists' profit. Marx argued this competition would cause businesses that could not reduce costs sufficiently to be forced out of the industry or be absorbed by other firms. (Heilbroner, 1980\) Despite the fact that Marx acknowledged this continuous rise in efficiency, he believed it would inevitably lead to a race to the bottom where only monopolies would remain in a market.

In terms of class struggle, the alienation of workers was argued to be the principal reason the proletariat would rise up against the bourgeoisie. *“Marx's crucial premise in his early writings is that work constitutes man’s essence: we are truly human only when we are engaged in self-chosen purposeful activity.”* (Mount, 2018, 318\) Alienation for people is caused by: workers not owning the product of their labour, the process of labour being repetitive and monotonous and other people being treated either as competitors or bosses. This is supported by Marx’s belief that employers would relentlessly attempt to reduce the wages of workers in an effort to reduce their costs of labour and invest more into capital. Therefore, workers would feel more alienated. (Marx, 1867\) This isolation is made more significant as the class divide is increased due to more people becoming unemployed as competitors are forced out of their respective industries.  
Ultimately, the class divide would be so severe that a violent uprising would occur that would spell the end of capitalism.

It can be argued that Marx did not prove capitalism would end as it is still successful. It has been proven to be resilient with the USA being the economy with the highest GDP in the world for around 150 years. This suggests Marx was wrong in predicting inevitable crises for capitalism. (Sinn, 2017\)

One potential reason for capitalism not failing is the fact that the alienation of people has not always occurred and is therefore not inevitable. Marx argues that capitalism causes workers to feel dehumanised and ultimately not enjoy their jobs leading to them feeling disgruntled. In the modern day, this is not always the case as the wellbeing of employees has been shown to improve the efficiency of firms and their profits. Therefore, it is possible that it is advantageous for firms to support workers' happiness for the purpose of increasing firm value. This idea is explored in sustainable finance with the concept that social responsibility contributes positively to profitability.

The issue of alienation of workers, where they feel they have little ownership of what they produce, is mitigated by Employee Partnerships in the UK, e.g. the John Lewis Partnership. This is where workers own a stake in the firm and their bonuses are tied to its performance. This is not the standard for all businesses, rather it is an exception. Marxists might dismiss schemes like this as a way to disguise an otherwise exploitative relationship giving workers a false sense of ownership. (Buchholz, 1989\)

Marx’s idea of alienation of workers also was based on a view that society had two main classes, where there was a tiny bourgeoisie and a vast, poor proletariat. This has not materialised. Furthermore, following WWII a large middle class emerged, (Buchholz, 1989\) further reducing the likelihood of alienation as wealth is not fully  concentrated in one group. This supports the idea that capitalism does not inherently reduce class relations to a struggle between two classes.

Marx built his theories of the end of capitalism based on a certainty that poverty was a tool used by the bourgeoisie to suppress wages. However, another major 19th century theory from Thomas Robert Malthus was that poverty is explained by the population principle: the idea that whenever a technological advancement would occur, a rise in wages would only occur temporarily and that society would expand, causing wages to fall back to the subsistence level. (Heilbroner, 1953, 71\) This implies poverty could arguably be an inescapable law of nature rather than of capitalism.  
Malthus’ idea of unemployment was a consequence of there being too many people. This contrasts the idea that is used as a foundation for Marx’s theories. Ultimately, if Malthus is correct, Marx was wrong about his understanding of poverty and capitalism because overthrowing capitalism would not end poverty.

Marx’s theory of Labour as a Source of Value is that only labour (variable capital) creates surplus, whereas technology (constant capital) transfers its own value to the final product. As competition drives innovation, firms invest in constant capital and less in labour causing the rate of profit to tend to fall despite efficiency rising. (Marx, 1867).  
In modern day society, there is a high amount of investment in constant capital. The investment in AI, which is currently one of the most invested-in sectors is a key example of this and AI is arguably designed to replace labour. From a marxist perspective, this is an example of firms over investing in capital which in turn drives down the rate of profit for the whole economy. (Desai, 2002\) However, the empirical evidence for this tendency is weak. (Unlearning Economics, 2023).  
This replacement of labour with capital could mean a confirmation that workers will be alienated. This is because many workers could be made redundant, leading wealth and income to become more concentrated with income only flowing to firm owners, and workers seeing their wages fall or disappear. Therefore, the divide between the rich and the poor would increase and thus promote a feeling of alienation. (Buchholz, 1989\)

It seems that  Karl Marx intended to prove capitalism was going to end. Todd G. Buchholz *proposes he did in New Ideas from Dead Economists stating, “Marx did not intend to prophesise. He aimed at scientific prediction, projecting the course of history on identifiable tendencies”*. (Buchholz, 1989, 175\) The adjective “*scientific”* suggests Marx believed the end of capitalism was not up to interpretation or arguable. Furthermore, Marx believed capitalism was a stage in “Historical Materialism” that intrinsically led to the next stage (socialism/communism) due to the class struggles in capitalism. This idea is further reinforced by Marx writing in Das Kapital, *“Its fall and Victory of the Proletariat are equally inevitable”*. (Marx, 1867\)

However, Karl Marx did not believe that the end of capitalism would always be violent. Upon visiting Amsterdam in 1872, Marx stated that “Capitalism could end peacefully in England and the USA”. (Marx, 1872\) This idea is supported because there was more democratic power for the people in England and the USA; the people could win an election to legislate the transition to socialism. While this idea proves Marx did not believe the transition to socialism would intrinsically be violent it reinforces the concept that it was inevitable. As well as that, Marx followed this statement with saying, *“We must recognise the fact that most countries on the Continent the lever of our revolution must be force…”*. (Marx, 1872\)

Karl Marx intended to prove the end of capitalism was a scientific inevitability as a part of historical materialism. He believed this to not be a subjective view or an estimate. Ultimately, Karl Marx's central prediction has appeared to be wrong; capitalism has had enduring success. Moreover, the majority of economies are capitalist which suggests the system is not doomed. Despite this, Marx’s analysis remains a tool for understanding the concentration of wealth and the fragility of labour markets. (The Economist, 2017\) Furthermore, his theories remain useful in the 21st century particularly while investigating the relationship between investment into capital and the protection of labour.

**List of References:**

Buchholz, T. G. (1989). *New Ideas from Dead Economists*. Penguin Publishing Group.  
Desai, M. (2002). *Marx’s Reven*ge: The Resurgence of Capitalism and the Death of Statist Socialism.  
Heilbroner, R. (1980). *Marxism For & Against*.  
Marx, K. (1859). *A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy*.  
Marx, K. (1867). *Das Kapital Vol. 1*.  
Marx, K. (1872). Speech on the Hague Congress.  
Mount, F. (2018). *Prime Movers*. Simon & Schuster, Limited.  
Heilbroner, R. (1953). *The Worldly Philosophers*. Compton Printing Ltd.a  
Sinn, H. (2017). What Marx means today. Economic Affairs (Harlow).  
	[https://doi.org/10.1111/ecaf.12243](https://doi.org/10.1111/ecaf.12243)  
The Economist. (2017). Labour is right \- Karl Marx has a lot to teach today’s politicians.  
Unlearning Economics. (2023). The Astonishingly Poor Empirics of the Tendency of the Rate of Profit to Fall.  
https://unlearnecon.medium.com/the-astonishingly-poor-empirics-of-the-tendency-of-the-rate-of-profit-to-fall-a9d062d0dc64  
Wolff, J. (2003). *Why Read Marx Today?* Oxford University Press